Write-ahead Logging design doc (#249)
apache/skywalking-banyandb: docs/concept/wal.md

# Background

> The data is stored in memory first, then will be flushed to disk. During this time, if service downtime, the data in memory will lose.
> So the goal of the write-ahead logging(WAL) is to solve this problem. And WAL is designed as a dependent component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Write Ahead Logging (WAL) is a technique used in databases to ensure that data is not lost due to system crashes or other failures. The basic idea of WAL is to log changes to a database in a separate file before applying them to the database itself. This way, if there is a system failure, the database can be recovered by replaying the log of changes from the WAL file.

BanyanDB leverages the WAL to enhance the data buffer for schema resource writing. In such a system, write operations are first written to the WAL file before being applied to the interval buffer. This ensures that the log is written to disk before the actual data is written. Hence the term "write ahead".
```

# Format

![](/assets/wal-format.jpg)

> Wal file consists of a series of segments, which have their WAL buffer, and data in the WAL buffer flush to every segment by appending WAlEntry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A segment refers to a block of data in the WAL file that contains a sequence of database changes. Once `rotate` is invoked, a new segment is created to continue logging subsequent changes.

A "WALEntry" is a data unit representing a series of changes to a Series. Each WALEntry is written to a segment.
```

WAlEntry contains as follows:
- Length:8 bytes, which means the length of a WalEntry.
- Series ID:8 bytes, the same as request Series ID.
- Count:4 bytes, how many binary/timestamps in one WalEntry.
- Timestamp:8 bytes.
- Binary Length:2 bytes.
- Binary: value in the write request.

# Write process

![](/assets/wal.jpg)

The writing process in WAL is as follows:

> 1. Store in the WAL buffer, Requests with the same series ID will aggregate a WALEntry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Firstly, the changes are first written to the write buffer. Those with the same series ID will go to the identical WALEntry.
```

> 2. When the buffer is full, the WALEntry will be flushed to the disk by batch write. For performance reasons, we use the compression algorithm snappy default. And WALEntry is appended to the end of the WAL file in the disk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. When the buffer is full, the WALEntry is created, then being flushed to the disk. WAL can optionally use the compression algorithm snappy to compress the data on disk. Each WALEntry is appended to the tail of the WAL file on the disk.
```

> When WAL is flushed to the disk, a callback will generate. You can choose to ignore this callback function to obtain higher performance, but it will cause the risk of losing data.

Reviewer: The `callback` should be the return value of `write`.

> ![](https://github.com/apache/skywalking-website/tree/master/static/doc-graph/banyandb/v0.4.0/wal.png)

Reviewer 2: @hanahmily Is the graph good? If so, we should merge the website side PR, and update the link pointing to skywalking.a.o like this

https://skywalking.apache.org/doc-graph/banyandb/v0.2.0/structure.png

When entries in the buffer are flushed to the disk, the callback function returned by the write operation is invoked. You can ignore this function to improve the writing performance, but it risks losing data.
# Read WAL

> When reading the WAL file, if the compression option is configured in the writing process, the read operation will decompress the WAL file first. Getting the size of a WALEntry by the length in the header of every WALEntry so that all the WALEntries can be read.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A client could read a single segment by a segment id. When opening the segment file, the reader will decompress the WAL file if the writing compresses the data. 
```

# Rotation

> WAL supports rotation operation to switch among segments. When you call the rotation operation, the old segment will be closed and the new one will be created, and return all info of the old segment, you can use it to do other operations such as delete the old WAL segment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WAL supports rotation operation to switch to a new segment. The operation closes the currently open segment and opens a new one, returning the closed segment details. 
```

# Delete

> When the WAL segment is invalid, it can be deleted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A client could delete a segment closed by the `rotate` operation.
```

# configuration

> BanyanDB WAL has the following ow configuration options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BanyanDB WAL has the following configuration options:
```

A segment refers to a block of data in the WAL file that contains a sequence of database changes. Once `rotate` is invoked, a new segment is created to continue logging subsequent changes.
A "WALEntry" is a data unit representing a series of changes to a Series. Each WALEntry is written to a segment.

WAlEntry contains as follows:
- Length:8 bytes, which means the length of a WalEntry.
- Series ID:8 bytes, the same as request Series ID.
- Count:4 bytes, how many binary/timestamps in one WalEntry.
- Timestamp:8 bytes.
- Binary Length:2 bytes.
- Binary: value in the write request.

# Write process

![](https://github.com/apache/skywalking-website/tree/master/static/doc-graph/banyandb/v0.4.0/wal.png)

The writing process in WAL is as follows:

1. Firstly, the changes are first written to the write buffer. Those with the same series ID will go to the identical WALEntry.
2. When the buffer is full, the WALEntry is created, then flushed to the disk. WAL can optionally use the compression algorithm snappy to compress the data on disk. Each WALEntry is appended to the tail of the WAL file on the disk.

> When WAL is flushed to the disk, it will return the value of write. You can choose to ignore this callback function to obtain higher performance, but it will cause the risk of losing data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When entries in the buffer are flushed to the disk, the callback function returned by the write operation is invoked. You can ignore this function to improve the writing performance, but it risks losing data.
```

# Read WAL

> When reading the WAL file, it needs to decompress first. You can get the size of a WALEntry by the length in the header of every WALEntry so that you can read all the WALEntries.

Reviewer: Does the client have to decode the binary? “You” might be refreshed client-side that uses the WAL from the context.

# Rotation

> WAL supports rotation operation to switch among segments.

Reviewer: You had better describe the segment-switching process in this section.

# Delete

> When the WAL file is invalid, it can be deleted.

Reviewer: Deleting removes a segment instead of the whole WAL, right?

# configuration

> BanyanDB support configuration parameter：

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BanyanDB WAL has the following ow configuration options:
```

| Name | Default Value | Introduction |
| --- | --- | --- |

> | wal_compression | true | Compression default, you can close it by using false value |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| wal_compression | true | Compress the WAL entry or not |
```

> # Wal Format

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# WAL Format
```

Reviewer: Initialisms are typically capitalized

> 

Reviewer: Add an _overview_ section to describe the background and goal of WAL.

![](/assets/wal-format.jpg)

> 

Reviewer: There are many grammar mistakes here. Could you check them at https://app.grammarly.com/ ?

> Wal file consist of a series of WalEntry，WalEntry contain as follows:

Reviewer: Does A WAL is a single file? The canonical path is to generate a series of files that are named _segments_. Rotation will delete or overwrite a single segment instead of the whole WAL.

- Length:8 bytes,means length of a WalEntry.
- Series ID:8 bytes,the same as request Series ID.
- Count:4 bytes,how many binary/timestamp in one WalEntry. 
- Timestamp:8 bytes.
- Binary Length:2 bytes.
- Binary:value in write request.

# Write process

![](/assets/wal.jpg)

> When client send a request,the the request will be sent to the tsdb instance corresponding to the group.And when tsdb receives a write request, the following steps occur:

Reviewer: It's not good practice to mention the tsdb and group. Regularly, WAL should not presume any dedicated users or invokers.

Reviewer: This section should focus on the internal component instead of the external ones.

1. The write request is store in wal buffer .Request  in buffer will aggregate a WalEntry .For the performance reasons,we use compression algorithm snappy.
2. WalEntry appended to the end of the WAL file in disk,It is batch write.
3. The data buffer is updated.
4. The write request is successful and return.

BanyanDB support wal configuration，you can omit step 2 if there is a requirement for performance and data loss can be tolerated.Pay attention to it will cause losing data possibly.
Even if you can close wal when node only used to data forwarding.

> 

Reviewer: Add a section to describe how to read WAL.

# Rotation

> Because of the strict write order，The request record in wal file is the same as data buffer.So when data buffer flush in disk,wal file will delete and a new will create,and delete is logical delete,not delete really. 

Reviewer: WAL is a standalone module instead of a file. A segment is an underlying file. You'll need to specify how to rotate segments here.

> # API

Reviewer: This section should be as the comment on WAL's interface. Please remove it.

`rotate()`

This rotate API used to delete data which had been flush in disk.The following scenarios may use this API

- Flush data buffer to disk.
- Replay wal file when BanyanDB instance init. 

`read()`

This API used for read wal file.Corresponding to the following scenarios:

- Replay wal file when init BanyanDB instance init.
- Wal replicate.

# configuration
BanyanDB support configuration parameter：

| Name | Default Value | Introduction |
| --- | --- | --- |

> | wal | open | Open defaultly, close when value is close. |

Reviewer: WAL doesn't need this item. BTW, use `true` or `false` as the value.

> | wal_persistent | open | Open defaultly, you can set close if there is a requirement for performance and data loss can be tolerated. |

Reviewer: This should be the return value of the `write` function instead of a parameter.
